= TOC Table of contents

* Context

  - {https://github.com/prisma/prisma/issues/15133}[Original issue]
  - Pull request with test repro: TODO

* Diagnosis

   Note that all of the following is specific to PostgreSQL. Other databases handle prepared statements differently.

** The prepared statement cache

   In order to resolve a Prisma Client request, the Query Engine issues database queries. The queries consist of SQL and bound parameters:

   @code sql
   INSERT INTO test (col1, col2) VALUES ($1, $2)
   @end

   With quaint, the database library used by the query engine, this is a single call:

   @code rust
   conn.query_raw("INSERT INTO test (col1, col2) VALUES ($1, $2)", &[param1, param2]).await?
   @end

   One might expect that this matches one network roundtrip between the client
   and the database, but there are potentially two roundtrips involved.

   - The first with the SQL string to /prepare/ the statement. The client /may/
     choose to also indicate what type of parameter it will send for each of
     the numbered placeholders. The database returns a /prepared statement
   object/ that consists mainly of an identifier and of the types of the
     parameters it expects for each of the placeholders (`$1` and `$2` in this
     case).
   - The second with the prepared statement identifier and the parameter values.

   For an application using PostgreSQL directly, the expected workflow is that
   a given query will be prepared once, then reused while the database
   connection on which it was prepared lasts.

   In Prisma, since we do not want to expose that to the users or even to the
   query engine, we rely on /prepared statement caching/ in quaint. We have a
   LRU cache mapping a SQL string to its corresponding prepared statement.

   This was fine until we started sending type information when preparing
   queries, with Prisma 4
   ({https://github.com/prisma/prisma/releases/tag/4.0.0}[Prisma 4.0.0 — improvedQueryRaw is
   now generally available]).

** The Bug

   @code prisma
   model TestModel {
       id  Int @id @default(autoincrement())
       col String? @test.Uuid
   }
   @end

   Since Prisma 4.0, given the schema above, the following scenario can happen with raw queries:

   - First insert a row in `TestModel` with `null` or `undefined` in the `col` column.
   -- The SQL looks like this: `INSERT INTO "TestModel" (col) VALUES ($1)`
   -- The prepared statement cached in quaint has the type of the `$1` parameter inferred, to the same as the column type: `UUID`.
   - Now insert a second row with the same query, but with a string parameter (as that would naturally happen with the typescript Prisma Client).
   -- The inferred parameter type is `UUID`, but the one we send is `TEXT`, leading to a database error: 
    > ERROR: column "col" is of type uuid but expression is of type text. HINT: You will need to rewrite or cast the expression."

   This is easily reproducible in QE tests.

* Solution exploration

** Document the workaround

   This is what the `HINT` section recommends in the postgres error. The user
   can adapt their query to signal intent to send values of a certain type. In
   the example above, `TEXT`.

   The fixed query looks like this:

   @code sql
   INSERT INTO "TestModel" (col) VALUES ($1::TEXT::UUID)
   @end

   This is a relatively general solution. Julius also suggested it in
   {https://github.com/prisma/prisma/issues/15133#issuecomment-1234242370}[this
   issue comment].

** Make the param types part of the cache key

    Hash the discriminants. Overhead of x bytes.

** Coerce the parameters


